probably - Model Calibration - pre-release (#608)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/model-calibration/index.Rmd

**diagnosing** the prediction's performance. These are more commonly known as 
**calibration plots**.

## Calibration Plots

The idea behind a calibration plot is that if we group the predictions based on 
their probability, then we should see an percentage of events ^[We can think of 
an **event** as the outcome that is being tracked by the probability. For 
example, in a model predicting "heads" or "tails", and we want to calibrate the
probability for "tails", then the **event** is when the column containing the 
outcome, has the value of "tails".]  that match such probability. 

For example, if we collect a group of the predictions whose probabilities are 
estimated to be about 10%. We should expect that about 10% of the those in the 
group to indeed be events. The plots shown below can be used as diagnostics to 
see if our predictions are consistent with the observed event rates. 

### Example Data

If you would like to follow along, load the probably and dplyr packages 
into you R session.

```{r}
library(tidymodels)
library(probably)
```

The probably package comes with a few data sets. For most of the examples in this post,

> we will use `segment_logistic`. It is an example data set that contains

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we will use `segment_logistic`, an example data set that contains predicted probabilities and classes from a logistic regression model for a binary outcome `Class`, taking values `"good"` or `"bad"`.
```

> predictions, and their probabilities. `Class` contains the outcome of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> "good" and "poor", `.pred_good` contains the probability that the event is "good". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`.pred_good` contains the probability that the event is "good". 
```

```{r}
segment_logistic
```

### Binned Plot

> On smaller data sets, it is a challenging to obtain an accurate *event rate* 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On smaller data sets, it is challenging to obtain an accurate *event rate* 
```

for a given probability. For example, if there are 5 predictions with about a 50% 
probability, and 3 of those are events, the plot would show a 60% event rate.
This comparison would not be appropriate because there are not enough predictions

> to really determine how close to 50% the model really is. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to determine how close to 50% the model really is. 
```

What is "model" here referring to?

> The most common approach to group the probabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common approach is to group the probabilities
```

into bins, or buckets.  Usually, the data is split into 10 discrete buckets,
from 0 to 1 (0 - 100%). The *event rate* and the *bin midpoint* is 
calculated for each bin. 

> In probably, binned calibration plots can be created using `cal_plot_breaks()`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the probably package, binned calibration plots can be created using `cal_plot_breaks()`. 
```

> It expects a data set, and the un-quoted variable names that contains the events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It expects a data set (`.data`), the un-quoted variable names that contain the events
```

(`truth`), and the probabilities (`estimate`). For the example here, we pass the 
`segment_logistic` data set, and use `Class` and `.pred_good` as the arguments. 
By default, this function will create a calibration plot with 10 buckets (breaks):

> ```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with 10 bins, created with the cal_plot_breaks() function"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{r, fig.alt = "A ggplot line plot with predicted probabilities on the x axis and event rates on the y axis, both ranging from 0 to 1. A dashed line lies on the identity line y equals x, and is loosely followed by a solid line that joins a series of dots representing the midpoint for each of 10 bins. Past predicted probabilities of 0.5, the dots consistently lie below the dashed line."}
```

Screen readers will be able to read the source code, so noting the function used in the chunk in the alt text will be read redundantly. You do a good job of narrating before/after the plot what the "message" ought to be in each, so that part is taken care of, but a bit more description of what's happening in each would be appreciated—a demo for this plot above!

segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good)
```

```{r}
#| include: false
bin_plot_data <- segment_logistic %>% .cal_binary_table_breaks(Class, .pred_good)
```

The calibration plot for the ideal model will essentially be perfect incline line
that start at (0,0) and ends in (1,1). In the case of this model, we can see 
that the seventh point has an event rate of 
`r round(bin_plot_data$event_rate[7] * 100, 1)`% despite having estimated 
probabilities ranging from 60% to 70%. This indicates that the model is not creating
predictions in this region that are consistent with the data (i.e., it is 
under-predicting). 

The number of bins in `cal_plot_breaks()` can be adjusted using `num_breaks`. 
Here is an example of what the plot looks like if we reduce the bins from 10,
to 5:

> ```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with 5 bins, created with the cal_plot_breaks() function"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{r, fig.alt = "A calibration like that above, but with half as many bins. In this version of the plot, the solid line is less jagged, though still shows that dots consistently lie below the dashed line beyond a predicted probability of 0.5."}
```

Once you've described visual elements of a plot, feel free to reference them in later alt text ^^

segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good, num_breaks = 5 )
```

The number of breaks is a bit like a tuning parameter for these plots and should
be based on ensuring that there is enough data in each bin to adequately estimate
the observed event rate. If your data are small, the next version of the calibration
plot might be a better solution. 

### Windowed

Another approach is to use overlapping ranges, or windows. Like the previous plot, we bin the data and calculate the event rate. However, we can add more bins by allowing them to overlap. If the data set size is small, one strategy is to use a set of wide bins that overlap one another.

> There are two variables that control the windows. The **step size**, controls the frequency of the windows. If we set a step size of 5%, will create a new window every 5% probability (5%, 10%, 15%... etc). The second argument is the (maximum) **window size**. If it is set to 10%, then a given step will overlap halfway into the previous step, as well as the next step. Here is a visual representation of this specific scenario:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two variables that control the windows. The **step size** controls the frequency of the windows. If we set a step size of 5%, windows will be created for each 5% increment in predicted probability (5%, 10%, 15%, etc). The second argument is the (maximum) **window size**. If it is set to 10%—and the step size is set at 5%—then a given step will overlap halfway into both the previous step and the next step. Here is a visual representation of this specific scenario:
```

```{r, fig.alt = "Plot illustrating the horizontal location of each step and the size of the window"}
#| echo: false
#| fig.width: 6
#| fig.height: 4
#| out.width: 70%
windows_size <- 0.10
step_size    <- 0.05

steps <- seq(0, 1, by = step_size)
lower_cut <- steps - (windows_size / 2)
lower_cut[lower_cut < 0] <- 0
upper_cut <- steps + (windows_size / 2)
upper_cut[upper_cut > 1] <- 1

tibble(
  step = steps,
  lower = lower_cut,
  upper = upper_cut,

>   group = seq_along(steps)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  group = seq_along(steps) / length(steps)
```

My eyes initially tried to make sense of the y axis in this plot—maybe we can normalize to [0, 1] so that that range looks more like it could represent event rates?

) %>% 
  ggplot(aes(x = step, y = group)) + 
  geom_errorbar(aes(xmin = lower, xmax = upper)) +
  labs(y = NULL, x = "predicted probability") +
  theme_minimal()
```

In probably, the `cal_plot_windowed()` function provides this functionality. 
The default step size is 0.05, and can be changed via the `step_size` argument.

> The default window size is 0.1, and can be changed via the `window_size` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default window size is 0.1, and can be changed via the `window_size` argument:
```

```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with 21 windows, created with the cal_plot_windowed() function"}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_windowed(Class, .pred_good)
```

> Here is an example of reducing the `step_size` from 0.05, to 0.02. There are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of reducing the `step_size` from 0.05 to 0.02. There are
```

more than double the windows:

```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with more steps than the default, created with the cal_plot_windowed() function"}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_windowed(Class, .pred_good, step_size = 0.02)
```

> 

Reviewer: I really appreciated how the Binned section transitioned to the Windowed one by motivating with a use case via "If your data are small, the next version...". Is there analogue here for when windowed diagnostics are helpful vs. model-based ones?

Author: Not sure if there's one

@topepo - Any thoughts?

Reviewer 2: > Is there analogue here for when windowed diagnostics are helpful vs. model-based ones?

Hmm. I don't think so. I can't think of a rule that would indicate which should be used; they are just different approaches.

### Model-Based

Another way to visualize the performance is to fit a classification model of the
events against the estimated probabilities. This is helpful because it avoids the use of

> pre-determined groupings. Another difference, is that we are not plotting 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pre-determined groupings. Another difference is that we are not plotting 
```

midpoints of actual results, but rather predictions based on those results. 

The `cal_plot_logistic()` provides this functionality. By default, it uses a 
logistic regression. There are two possible methods for fitting: 

> spline model, provided by the `mgcv` package. The idea is to visualize

Reviewer: Is there some missing text that used to live between these lines?

a smooth line based on the predictions based on the `smooth` argument:

* `smooth = TRUE` (the default) fits a generalized additive model using splines. This allows for more flexible model fits. 
* `smooth = FALSE` uses an ordinary logistic regression model with linear terms for the predictor.

As an example: 

```{r, fig.alt = "Logistic Spline calibration plot, created with the cal_plot_logistic() function"}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_logistic(Class, .pred_good)
```

> The cooresponding `glm()` model produces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The corresponding `glm()` model produces:
```

```{r, fig.alt = "Ordinary logistic calibration plot, created with the cal_plot_logistic() function"}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_logistic(Class, .pred_good, smooth = FALSE)
```

### Additional options and features

> #### Intervals

Reviewer: In the deploy preview, it's hard to tell the difference between the L3 header above and this L4 one. Maybe we can delete the L4 headers and inline bold the first mentions of **interval**s and **rugs**?

The confidence intervals are visualized using the gray ribbon. The default
interval is 0.9, but can be changed using the `conf_level` argument.  

```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with a confidence interval set to 0.8"}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good, conf_level = 0.8)
```

If desired, the intervals can be removed by setting the `include_ribbon` 
argument to `FALSE`.

```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with the confidence interval ribbon turned off"}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good, include_ribbon = FALSE)
```

#### Rugs

By default, the calibration plots include a RUGs layer at the top and at the 
bottom of the visualization.  They are meant to give us an idea of the density

> of events, versus the density of non-events as the probabilities progress from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of events and non-events as the probabilities progress from
```

0 to 1. 

```{r, echo = FALSE, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with arrows pointing to where the RUGS plots are placed in the graph"}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good) +
  geom_segment(
    x = 0.5, 
    xend = 0.6, 
    y = 0.9, 
    yend = 1, 
    arrow = arrow(length = unit(0.3, "cm")),
    color = "#ffaaff"
    ) +
  geom_text(x = 0.5, y = 0.87, label = "Density of events", color = "#ff88ff")  +
  geom_segment(
    x = 0.5, 
    xend = 0.6, 
    y = 0.1, 
    yend = 0.0, 
    arrow = arrow(length = unit(0.3, "cm")),
    color = "#ffaaff"
    ) +
  geom_text(x = 0.5, y = 0.13, label = "Density of non-events", color = "#ff88ff")
```

> This can layer can be removed by setting `include_rug` to `FALSE`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This layer can be removed by setting `include_rug` to `FALSE`:
```

```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot without RUGS"}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good, include_rug = FALSE) 
```

## Integration with tune

So far, the inputs to the functions have been data frames. In tidymodels, the tune package has methods for resampling models as well as functions for tuning hyperparameters. 

> The calibration plots in probably also support the results of these functions (with class `tune_results`). The functions read the metadata from the tune object, and the `truth` and `estimate` arguments automatically. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The calibration plots in the probably package also support the results of these functions (with class `tune_results`). The functions read the metadata from the tune object, and the `truth` and `estimate` arguments automatically. 
```

To showcase this feature, we will tune a model based on simulated data. In order
for the calibration plot to work, the predictions need to be collected. This is

> done by setting `save_pred` to `TRUE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
done by setting `save_pred` to `TRUE` in `tune_grid()`'s control settings.
```

```{r, eval = TRUE}
set.seed(111)
sim_data <- sim_classification(500)
sim_folds <- vfold_cv(sim_data, repeats = 3)

rf_mod <- rand_forest(min_n = tune()) %>% set_mode("classification")

set.seed(222)
tuned_model <- 
  rf_mod %>% 
  tune_grid(
    class ~ .,
    resamples = sim_folds,
    grid = 4,
    # Important: `saved_pred` has to be set to TRUE in order for 
    # the plotting to be possible
    control = control_resamples(save_pred = TRUE)
  )

tuned_model
```

The plotting functions will automatically collect the predictions. Each of the 
pre-processing groups will be plotted individually in its own facet.

```{r, fig.alt = "Multiple calibration plots presented in a grid"}
tuned_model %>% 
  cal_plot_logistic() 
```

> A panel is produced for each value of `min_n`, coded with a automatically generated configuration name. This makes sure to use the out-of-sample data to make the plot (instead of just re-predicting the training set). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A panel is produced for each value of `min_n`, coded with an automatically generated configuration name. This makes sure to use the out-of-sample data to make the plot (instead of just re-predicting the training set). 
```

## Preparing for the next stage

As mentioned in the outset of this post, the goal is to also provide a way to
calibrate the model, and to apply the calibration to future predictions.  We have
made sure that the plotting functions are ready now to accept multiple probability
sets.

In this post, we will showcase that functionality by "manually" creating a quick 

> calibration model, we we can use it to compare to the original probabilities. We will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calibration model and comparing its output to the original probabilities. We will
```

> need both of them to be on the same data frame, and to have a way of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need both of them in the same data frame, as well as a variable
```

distinguishing the original probabilities from the calibrated probabilities. In
this case we will create a variable called `source`:

```{r}
model <- glm(Class ~ .pred_good, segment_logistic, family = "binomial")

preds <- predict(model, segment_logistic, type = "response")
  
combined <- bind_rows(
  mutate(segment_logistic, source = "original"), 
  mutate(segment_logistic, .pred_good = 1 - preds, source = "glm")
  )

combined 
```

The new plot functions support dplyr groupings. So, to overlay the two
groups, we just need to pass `source` to `group_by()`: 

```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with two overlaying probability trends, one is the original and the second is the model"}
combined %>%
  group_by(source) %>%
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good)
```

If we would like to plot them side by side, we can add `facet_wrap()` as an
additional step of the plot:

```{r, fig.alt = "Calibration plot with two side-by-side probability trends"}
combined %>% 
  group_by(source) %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good) +
  facet_wrap(~source) +
  theme(legend.position = "none")
```

Our goal in the future is to provide calibration functions that create the 

> models, and provide an easy way to visualize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
models, and provide an easy way to visualize them.
```

## Conclusion

> As mentioned at the top of this post. We look forward to your feedback as you try

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned at the top of this post, we welcome your feedback as you try
```

> out these features, and read about our plans for the new future. If you wish

Reviewer: ```suggestion
out these features and read about our plans for the future. If you wish
```

early awareness, and to receive feedback from the community. That is why the 
enhancements discussed here are not yet in CRAN. 

Even though the article is meant to introduce new package functionality. We also
have the goal of introducing model calibration conceptually. We want to provide
sufficient background for those who may not be familiar with model calibration.
If you are already familiar with this technique, feel free to skip to the 
[Setup](#example-data) section to get started. 

To install the version of probably used here: 

```{r, eval = FALSE}
remotes::install_github("tidymodels/probably")
```

## Model Calibration

*The goal of model calibration is to ensure that the estimated class probabilities 
consistent with what would naturally occur.* If a model has poor calibration, 
we might be able to post-process the original predictions to coerce them to have
better properties. 

There are two main components to model calibration:

- **Diagnosis** - Figuring out how well the original (and re-calibrated) probabilities 
perform.
- **Remediation** - Adjusting the original values to have better properties.

> This post has details on diagnosing issues. 

Reviewer 3: When reading this sentence I was asking myself if that was because that's what you've implemented so far. I think this section could nicely be combined with the next one.

## The Development Plan

As with everything in machine learning, there are several options to
consider when calibrating a model. Through the new features in the tidymodels
packages, we aspire to make those options as easily accessible as possible. 

Our plan is to implement model calibration in two phases: The first phase will focus
on binary models, and the second phase will focus on multi-class models. 

> The first batch of enhancements are now available in the development version of 
> probably. The enhancements are centered around plotting functions meant for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first batch of enhancements are now available in the development version of 
the probably package. The enhancements are centered around plotting functions meant for
```

**diagnosing** the prediction's performance. These are more commonly known as 
**calibration plots**.

## Calibration Plots

The idea behind a calibration plot is that if we group the predictions based on 
their probability, then we should see an percentage of events ^[We can think of 
an **event** as the outcome that is being tracked by the probability. For 
example, in a model predicting "heads" or "tails", and we want to calibrate the
probability for "tails", then the **event** is when the column containing the 
outcome, has the value of "tails".]  that match such probability. 

For example, if we collect a group of the predictions whose probabilities are 
estimated to be about 10%. We should expect that about 10% of the those in the 
group to indeed be events. The plots shown below can be used as diagnostics to 
see if our predictions are consistent with the observed event rates. 

## Example Data

If you would like to follow along, load the probably and dplyr packages 
into you R session.

```{r}
library(tidymodels)
library(probably)
```

> probably comes with a few data sets. For most of the examples in this post,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The probably package comes with a few data sets. For most of the examples in this post,
```

(`truth`), and the probabilities (`estimate`). For the example here, we pass the 
`segment_logistic` data set, and use `Class` and `.pred_good` as the arguments. 
By default, this function will create a calibration plot with 10 buckets (breaks):

```{r}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good)
```

```{r}
#| include: false
bin_plot_data <- segment_logistic %>% .cal_binary_table_breaks(Class, .pred_good)
```

The calibration plot for the ideal model will essentially be perfect incline line
that start at (0,0) and ends in (1,1). In the case of this model, we can see 
that the seventh point has an event rate of 
`r round(bin_plot_data$event_rate[7] * 100, 1)`% despite having estimated 
probabilities ranging from 60% to 70%. This indicates that the model is not creating
predictions in this region that are consistent with the data (i.e., it is 
under-predicting). 

The number of bins in `cal_plot_breaks()` can be adjusted using `num_breaks`. 
Here is an example of what the plot looks like if we reduce the bins from 10,
to 5:

```{r}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_breaks(Class, .pred_good, num_breaks = 5 )
```

> The number of breaks is a bit like a tuning parameter for these plots and should

Author: @topepo - This was a change you added. Any thoughts on this suggestion?

> The number of breaks is a bit like a tuning parameter for these plots and should

Reviewer 2: That's fine with me.

## Model-Based

Another way to visualize the performance is to fit a classification model of the
events against the estimated probabilities. This is helpful because it avoids the use of
pre-determined groupings. Another difference, is that we are not plotting 
midpoints of actual results, but rather predictions based on those results. 

The `cal_plot_logistic()` provides this functionality. By default, it uses a 
logistic regression. There are two possible methods for fitting: 

spline model, provided by the `mgcv` package. The idea is to visualize
a smooth line based on the predictions based on the `smooth` argument:

* `smooth = TRUE` (the default) fits a generalized additive model using splines. This allows for more flexible model fits. 
* `smooth = FALSE` uses an ordinary logistic regression model with linear terms for the predictor.

As an example: 

```{r}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_logistic(Class, .pred_good)
```

The cooresponding `glm()` model produces:

```{r}
segment_logistic %>% 
  cal_plot_logistic(Class, .pred_good, smooth = FALSE)
```

## Additional options and features

### Intervals

The confidence intervals are visualized using the gray ribbon. The default

> interval is 0.9, but can be changed using the `conf_level` argument.  

Reviewer 3: why is the default `0.9`?

Author: I think this is something that @topepo requested, do you have a different preference or suggested default?

Reviewer 3: I think I just noticed it because `0.95` is so ingrained in me 😅  If `0.9` is the common thing to do in this context then that should be the default.

Reviewer 2: It's a convention that I ~decreed~ adopted at the beginning of tidymodels. The variance in estimates becomes much larger as we get closer to one and 90% confidence seems a good middle ground. A lot of Bayesian people do the equivalent of 80% confidence.

Reviewer 3: Ah, thanks for the explanation! 🙌
